---
title: "EvCC - Automated Advising"
date: January 2014
start: "January 2014"
end: "January 2015"
excerpt: >-
  The Automated Advising System was an Algorithm's Club project at Everett
  Community College.
---

The Automated Advising System was an Algorithm's Club project at Everett
Community College.

### Goal

The goal of the project was to help alleviate the advising workload from the
teaching faculty at Everett Community College. At the time, they were
responsible for handling most of the student body's mandatory degree advising.

This was particularly an issue for the smaller departments (such as the CS
division, which had one dedicated faculty member at the time), who would receive
a drastic increase in workload during registration periods.

Another aspect of the project was cleaning up course information
inconsistancies. When the project began, a large amount of course information
was still recorded manually on Word documents. In many cases this led to issues
with communicating course prerequisites to students, as there were no enforced
standards as to how to record this information.

This was included as an aspect of the project due to our dependency on that
information.

### Proposal

To solve this problem, we designed a web based system that would allow students
to generate a potential course schedule based on information they provide. The
system would access a database of available courses and prerequisite
dependencies in order to determine what courses the student needed for the
desired degree, and would suggest a timeline.

This is not enough to completely replace in-person advising, but it would handle
a large number of smaller cases, and would give the advisor meetings a better
starting point.

### Role

I served as project manager for the club during my time at Everett, and was
responsible for facilitating communications between project teams. I also
particpated in high level design, prototyped front-end web systems, and
participated in database development.

### Results

I got started with the project shortly after I began pursuing an education in
Software Engineering. As such, this was my introduction to many professional
development tools and the development process in general.

Technology-wise, I learned the basics of having a web application communicate
with a database. I prototyped a login system, and began work on storing and
accessing course information in a database.

The project was also a great lesson on working with other developers of various
skill levels. One of the largest hurdles to the project was communication. While
the 1-3 hour long club meetings were very productive, at home progress was very
slow. Due in part to it being a side project for everyone, but there was also a
lack of understanding of individual responsibilities.

My early attempts at coordination were by email, which proved to be
unsuccessful. The issue was that most of the members of the team had very little
need for email otherwise and were not used to checking it. More modern forms of
communication, such as Skype, proved more successful.

The biggest lesson in project management was ensuring that every member had
clear short term goals. Without short-term goals, members will often retread old
ground or lack the motivation to work on the project at all. While it's
difficult to establish a long term timeline when working without prior
experience, setting up weekly tasks and deliverables during club meetings could
be accomplished after some talking.
